Private VLANs:

Service providers often have devices from multiple clients, as well as their own servers, on a single DMZ segment or VLAN. 
As security issues proliferate, it becomes necessary to provide traffic isolation between devices even though they may exist on the same Layer 3 segment or VLAN.

The traditional solution to address these ISP requirements is to provide one VLAN per customer, with each VLAN having its own IP subnet.
A Layer 3 device then provides interconnectivity and access control between VLANs and Internet destinations.

There are several challenges with this traditional solution:

a) Supporting a separate VLAN per customer can require a high number of interfaces on service provider network devices.
b) The network address space must be divided into many subnets, which wastes space and increases management complexity.
c) Multiple ACL applications are required to maintain security on multiple VLANs, resulting in increased management complexity.

PVLANs provide Layer 2 isolation between ports within the same VLAN. 
This isolation eliminates the need for a separate VLAN and IP subnet per customer.

PVLANs provide Layer 2 isolation between ports within the same VLAN.
This isolation eliminates the need for a separate VLAN and IP subnet per customer.

PVLANs provide Layer 2 isolation between ports within the same VLAN. 
This isolation eliminates the need for a separate VLAN and IP subnet per customer.

A port in a PVLAN can be one of three types: isolated, promiscuous, or community.

1) Isolated: These ports are access ports that are assigned to an isolated VLAN. 
   An isolated port has complete Layer 2 separation from other ports within the same primary PVLAN, except for a promiscuous port.
   PVLANs block all traffic to isolated ports, except the traffic from promiscuous ports.
   Traffic that is received from an isolated port is forwarded only to promiscuous ports.
   
2) Promiscuous:These ports are access ports that are assigned to a primary VLAN and typically connect to a router or firewall. 
   A promiscuous port can communicate with all ports within the PVLAN, including the community and isolated ports. 
   The default gateway for the segment would likely be hosted on a promiscuous port, given that all devices in the PVLAN need to communicate with that port.
   
3) Community:These ports are access ports that are assigned to a community VLAN. 
   Community ports communicate among themselves and with the promiscuous ports. 
   These interfaces are isolated at Layer 2 from all other interfaces in other communities or in isolated ports within their primary PVLAN.
   
   
PVLAN ports are associated with a set of supporting VLANs that are used to create the PVLAN structure.

A PVLAN uses a VLAN in three ways:

 a) As a primary VLAN: This type of VLAN carries traffic from promiscuous ports to isolated, community, and other promiscuous ports in the same primary VLAN.
 b) As an isolated VLAN: This type of VLAN carries traffic from isolated ports to a promiscuous port.
 c) As a community VLAN: This type of VLAN carries traffic between community ports and to promiscuous ports. 
    You can configure multiple community VLANs in a PVLAN.
 
Isolated and community VLANs are called secondary VLANs. 
You can extend PVLANs across multiple devices by trunking the primary, isolated, and community VLANs to other devices that support PVLANs.


Private VLAN Edge:

 In many environments, there is no valid reason for communication between neighbors (forwarding traffic at Layer 2 between ports on the same switch).
 On client or user VLANs, communication goes through central servers in the data center. 
 Blocking communication between neighbors effectively mitigates attacks between neighboring hosts, such as ARP cache poisoning.
 
 The same may be true in other circumstances. For example, if a subnet contains a number of web servers, those servers may not need to communicate with each other. 
 A web server may redirect a client from itself to another web server, but doing so constitutes a new client connection. 
 If a server is compromised, preventing it from communicating with others limits its use as a stepping stone in another attack. 
 In such an environment, the use of protected ports ensures that there is no exchange of unicast, broadcast, or multicast traffic between these ports on the switch.
 
 
 Protected ports, also referred to as PVLAN Edge, have the following features:
 
1)The switch does not forward any data traffic (unicast, multicast, or broadcast) from one protected port to any other protected port. 
  Only control traffic is forwarded because control traffic packets are processed by the CPU and forwarded in software.
  All data traffic that needs to pass between protected ports must be forwarded through a Layer 3 device.

2) The forwarding behavior between a protected port and a nonprotected port proceeds as usual.

PVLAN Edge is relevant only to the switch on which it is configured. 
PVLAN Edge provides the same function as PVLAN with regard to promiscuous and isolated ports. 
What it lacks is community ports. What it offers is a much simpler configuration.

#######
SwitchX(config)#interface range g0/1 - 22
SwitchX(config-if)#switchport protected
#######

show interfaces g0/1 switchport

########

Switch#show interfaces g0/1 switchport
Name: g0/1
Switchport: Enabled
Administrative Mode: dynamic desirable
Operational Mode: static access
Administrative Trunking Encapsulation: dot1q
Operational Trunking Encapsulation: native
Negotiation of Trunking: On
Access Mode VLAN: 1 (default)
Trunking Native Mode VLAN: 1 (default)

{output omitted}

Pruning VLANs Enabled: 2-1001
Capture Mode Disabled
Capture VLANs Allowed: ALL
Protected: true

########


Private VLAN Proxy Attack and Mitigation :


One network attack capable of bypassing the network security of PVLANs involves the use of a proxy to bypass access restrictions to a PVLAN.

In PVLAN environments, routers are normally connected via promiscuous ports.
In proxy attacks against PVLANs, frames are forwarded to a router which may reencapsulate the frame and send it back to the target device within the same PVLAN.

Attack:

The network attacker sends a packet with the source IP and MAC address of the attacker device, the destination IP address of the target system (host C in the example), but a destination MAC address of the router. 
The switch forwards the frame to the switch port of the router. 
The router processes the packet, rewriting the destination MAC address to that of the target, and forwarding the packet back to the PVLAN.
Now the packet has the proper format and is forwarded to the target system. 
In this scenario, the network defense is working as designed, but the attacker has figured out a way to circumvent the PVLAN rules.

Mitigation:

You can mitigate these PVLAN attacks by configuring ACLs on the router interface. 
Denying packets from the local subnet to the local subnet prevents the use of the router as a proxy in the PVLAN proxy attack. 
The example below builds such an ACL and applies it to an interface.

#####

Router(config)#access-list 101 permit icmp any host 10.0.1.1
Router(config)#access-list 101 deny ip 10.0.1.0 0.0.0.255 10.0.1.0 0.0.0.255
Router(config)#access-list 101 permit ip any any
Router(config)#interface g0/0
Router(config-if)#ip access-group 101 in

#####





 
 
 
