The IPsec VPN is an essential tool for providing a secure network for business communication. 
This section addresses the different protocols and algorithms that IPsec uses and the different security services that IPsec provides.

Review one or more topics before taking the challenge.

1)  IPsec VPNs
2)  IPsec Security Services
3)  IPsec Framework
4)  Internet Key Exchange
5)  IKE Phase 1
6)  Sample ISAKMP Configuration
7)  IPsec Protocols
8)  IKE Phase 2
9)  IPsec Configuration
10) Suite B Cryptographic Standard
11) IKE Version 2
12) IPsec with IPv6

1)  IPsec VPNs:

IPsec VPNs provide security services to traffic traversing a relatively less trustworthy network between two relatively more trusted systems or networks. The less-trusted network is usually the public Internet. 
But IPsec VPNs can also be used for things like protecting network management traffic as it crosses an organization intranet.

In terms of deployment mode, there are two basic types of VPNs: site-to-site VPNs and remote-access VPNs.

A site-to-site VPN is an extension of a classic WAN network. Site-to-site VPNs connect entire networks to each other.
For example, site-to-site VPNs can connect a branch office network to a company headquarters network. 
In the past, a leased-line or Frame Relay connection was required to connect sites, but because most corporations now have Internet access, these connections can be replaced with site-to-site VPNs.


Transport across a site-to-site VPN is transparent to the communicating hosts. 
The hosts send and receive normal TCP/IP traffic between each other. 
VPN gateways provide security services at the borders between the trusted and nontrusted networks. 
A VPN gateway is responsible for encrypting packets that are destined for the peer network, attaching message authentication codes, and encapsulating the protected data using a new IP header. 
The transformed packet is routed across the untrusted network that is based on the VPN gateway IP addresses specified in the new IP header. 
Upon receipt, the peer VPN gateway strips the headers, verifies and decrypts the content, and relays the original packet towards the target host inside its private network.
 
Remote-access VPN is an evolution of dialup connections. 
Remote-access VPNs can support the needs of telecommuters, mobile users, and extranet consumer-to-business traffic. 
Remote-access VPNs connect individual hosts that must access their company network securely over the Internet. 

In the past, corporations supported remote users by using dial-in networks and ISDN. 
With the advent of VPNs, a mobile user simply needs access to the Internet to communicate with the central office. 
For telecommuters, their Internet connectivity is typically a broadband, DSL, or cable connection.
 
 
In a remote-access VPN, each host typically has Cisco AnyConnect VPN Client software. 
Whenever the host tries to send any traffic, the Cisco VPN Client software encapsulates and encrypts that traffic before sending it over the Internet to the VPN gateway at the edge of the target network. 
Upon receipt, the VPN gateway behaves the same way that it does for site-to-site VPNs.

If a VPN is used to connect entities belonging to the same organization, it is considered an intranet VPN.
If a VPN is used to connect entities belonging to two different organizations, it is considered to be an extranet VPN.
This distinction is separate from site-to-site and remote access.
Site-to-site VPNs can be used for both intranet and extranet connections.
Similarly, remote-access VPNs can be used for both intranet and extranet connections.

While the focus of this section of the course is IPsec VPN technology, it is important to recognize that there are other VPN technologies.

SSL provides a suite of security services that is similar to the security services provided by IPsec.
SSL VPN has become popular for the implementation of remote-access VPNs.
IPsec remains dominant for the implementation of site-to-site VPNs. SSL VPN will be covered in a later section of the course.


IPsec and SSL VPNs are both cryptography-based VPNs.
VPNs can also be network-based. 
For example, a service provider can use a technology such as Frame Relay, ATM, or, more recently, MPLS to segregate customer traffic as it crosses a shared infrastructure.
The service provider is providing a network that is virtually private. 
While traffic physically crosses shared infrastructure, there is no mixing of traffic.
One customer cannot see another customer’s traffic. 
This behavior is different from IPsec VPN, which uses cryptographic technologies to transform packet data to provide privacy, data integrity, and origin authentication.

2)  IPsec Security Services:

IPsec provides these essential security functions:

a) Confidentiality: IPsec ensures confidentiality by using encryption.
   Data encryption prevents third parties from reading the data. Only the IPsec peer can decrypt and read the encrypted data.

b) Data integrity: IPsec ensures that data arrives unchanged at the destination, meaning that the data has not been manipulated at any point along the communication path. 
   IPsec ensures data integrity by using hash-based message authentication.

c) Origin authentication: Authentication ensures that the connection is made with the desired communication partner.
   Extended authentication can also be implemented to provide authentication of a user behind the peer system. 
   IPsec uses IKE to authenticate users and devices that can carry out communication independently. 
   IKE can use the following methods to authenticate the peer system:
    PSKs
    Digital certificates
    RSA encrypted nonces
 
d) Antireplay protection: Antireplay protection verifies that each packet is unique and is not duplicated. 
   IPsec packets are protected by comparing the sequence number of the received packets with a sliding window on the destination host or security gateway. 
   A packet that has a sequence number that comes before the sliding window is considered either late, or a duplicate packet. 
   Late and duplicate packets are dropped.
   
f) Key management: Allows for an initial exchange of dynamically generated keys across a nontrusted network and a periodic re-keying process, limiting the maximum amount of time and data that are protected with any one key.

The following are some of the encryption algorithms and key lengths that IPsec can use:

 * DES algorithm: DES was developed by IBM. DES uses a 56-bit key, ensuring high-performance encryption. 
   DES is a symmetric key cryptosystem.

 * 3DES algorithm: The 3DES algorithm is a variant of the 56-bit DES. 
   3DES operates in a way that is similar to how DES operates, in that data is broken into 64-bit blocks. 
   3DES then processes each block three times, each time with an independent 56-bit key. 
   3DES provides a significant improvement in encryption strength over 56-bit DES. 3DES is a symmetric key cryptosystem.

 * AES: The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has recently adopted AES to replace the aging DES-based encryption in cryptographic devices. 
   AES provides stronger security than DES and is computationally more efficient than 3DES.
   AES offers three different key lengths: 128-, 192-, and 256-bit keys.

 * RSA: RSA is an asymmetrical key cryptosystem. It commonly uses a key length of 1024 bits or larger. 
   IPsec does not use RSA for data encryption. IKE uses RSA encryption only during the peer authentication phase.


 * SEAL: SEAL is a stream cipher that was developed in 1993 by Phillip Rogaway and Don Coppersmith, which uses a 160-bit key for encryption.

Symmetric encryption algorithms such as AES require a common shared-secret key to perform encryption and decryption. 
You can use email, courier, or overnight express to send the shared-secret keys to the administrators of the devices. 
This method is obviously impractical, and does not guarantee that keys are not intercepted in transit.
Public-key exchange methods allow shared keys to be dynamically generated between the encrypting and decrypting devices.

 * The DH key agreement is a public key exchange method.
   This method provides a way for two peers to establish a shared-secret key, which only they know, even though they are communicating over an insecure channel.

 * ECDH is a variant of the DH protocol using ECC. It is part of the Suite B standards.
 
These algorithms are used within IKE to establish session keys. 
They support different prime sizes that are identified by different DH or ECDH groups.
DH groups vary in the computational expense that is required for key agreement and the strength against cryptographic attacks.
Larger prime sizes provide stronger security, but require more computational horsepower to execute.

DH1: 768-bit
DH2: 1024-bit
DH5: 1536-bit
DH14: 2048-bit
DH15: 3072-bit
DH16: 4096-bit
DH19: 256-bit ECDH
DH20: 384-bit ECDH
DH24: 2048-bit ECDH

VPN data is transported over untrusted networks such as the public Internet.
Potentially, this data could be intercepted and read or modified.
To guard against this, HMACs are utilized by IPsec.

IPsec uses HMAC as the data integrity algorithm that verifies the integrity of the message. 
The figure below depicts a keyed hash that is a simplification of the more complex HMAC algorithm. 
The HMAC algorithm itself is beyond the scope of this material.
HMAC is defined in RFC 2104. Like a keyed hash, HMAC utilizes a secret key known to the sender and the receiver.
But HMAC also adds padding logic and XOR logic, and utilizes two hash calculations to produce the message authentication code.


When you are conducting business long-distance, it is necessary to know who is at the other end of the phone, email, or fax.
The same is true of VPN networks. 
The device on the other end of the VPN tunnel must be authenticated before the communication path is considered secure.

* PSKs: A secret key value is entered into each peer manually and is used to authenticate the peer. 
  At each end, the PSK is combined with other information to form the authentication key.

* RSA signatures: The exchange of digital certificates authenticates the peers.
  The local device derives a hash and encrypts it with its private key. 
  The encrypted hash is attached to the message and is forwarded to the remote end, and it acts like a signature.
  At the remote end, the encrypted hash is decrypted using the public key of the local end. 
  If the decrypted hash matches the recomputed hash, the signature is genuine.

* RSA encrypted nonces: A nonce is a random number that is generated by the peer. 
  RSA-encrypted nonces use RSA to encrypt the nonce value and other values. 
  This method requires that each peer is aware of the public key of the other peer before negotiation starts. 
  For this reason, public keys must be manually copied to each peer as part of the configuration process. 
  This method is the least used of the three authentication methods.

* ECDSA signatures: The ECDSA is the elliptic curve analog of the DSA signature method. 
  ECDSA signatures are smaller than RSA signatures of similar cryptographic strength. 
  ECDSA public keys (and certificates) are smaller than similar-strength DSA keys, resulting in improved communications efficiency. 
  Furthermore, on many platforms, ECDSA operations can be computed more quickly than similar-strength RSA operations.
  These advantages of signature size, bandwidth, and computational efficiency may make ECDSA an attractive choice for many IKE and IKE version 2 (IKEv2) implementations.



3)  IPsec Framework

IPsec is a framework of open standards that spells out the rules for secure communications. 
IPsec relies on existing algorithms to implement encryption, authentication, and key exchange. 
The figure below illustrates some of the standard algorithms that IPsec uses. 
The framework allows technologies to be replaced over time. 
When cryptographic technologies become obsolete, it does not make the IPsec framework obsolete. 
Current technologies are swapped to replace the obsolete technologies, keeping the framework in place. 
For example, AES is now commonly implemented for confidentiality in place of the aging DES and 3DES technologies. 
Similarly, SHA-2 based algorithms are used for data integrity, in place of the aging MD5 and SHA-1 based algorithms.

 
 
4)  Internet Key Exchange:

IPsec implements a VPN solution using an encryption process that involves the periodic changing of encryption keys.
IPsec uses the IKE protocol to authenticate a peer computer and to generate encryption keys. 
IKE negotiates an SA, which is an agreement between two peers engaging in an IPsec exchange, and the SA consists of all the required parameters that are necessary to establish successful communication.

IPsec uses the IKE protocol to provide these functions:
* Negotiation of SA characteristics
* Automatic key generation
* Automatic key refresh
* Manageable manual configuration

There are two versions of the IKE protocol: IKE version 1 (IKEv1) and IKE version 2 (IKEv2). 

IKEv2 was created to overcome some of the limitations of IKEv1. IKEv2 provides the following enhancements:
It provides simplicity and increases speed, by requiring fewer transactions to establish security associations. A simplified initial exchange of messages reduces latency and increases connection establishment speed.
It incorporates many extensions that supplement the original IKE protocol. Examples include NAT traversal, dead peer detection, and initial contact support.
It provides stronger security through DoS protection and other functions.
It provides reliability by using sequence numbers, acknowledgments, and error correction.
It provides flexibility, through support for EAP as a method for authenticating VPN endpoints.
It provides mobility, by using the IKEv2 Mobility and Multihoming Protocol (MOBIKE) extension. This enhancement allows mobile users to roam and change IP addresses without disconnecting their IPsec session.

5)  IKE Phase 1:

The basic purpose of IKE Phase 1 is to negotiate IKE policy sets, authenticate peers, and set up a secure channel between the peers. 
IKEv1 Phase 1 occurs in one of two modes: main mode and aggressive mode.

Main mode has three two-way exchanges between the initiator and receiver. 
These exchanges define which encryption and authentication protocols are acceptable, how long keys should remain active, and whether PFS should be enforced.

Main mode includes three exchanges:

First exchange: Peers negotiate and agree upon the algorithms and hashes that will be used as a basic security policy to secure the subsequent IKE communications. 
The initiator sends a list of policy proposals to the responder.
The responder selects a policy from the list, and replies back to the initiator, indicating which of the policies it selected.

Second exchange: Diffie Hellman key agreement is implemented with the second two-way exchange. 
The peers generate their public and private nonces, and send their public nonce unprotected to their peer. 
Each uses their own private nonce along with their peers public nonce to calculate the agreed upon key material. 
That exchange is the last clear text exchange. All further negotiation is encrypted within the IKE SA.

Third exchange: At this point, shared key material for privacy and data integrity is available on both peers. 
The security association is built, but the peers have not yet authenticated each other. 
The third exchange is protected by the SA. If authentication succeeds, the SA is available for subsequent exchanges between the peers.
If authentication fails, the SA is terminated.

Aggressive mode:

Aggressive mode, on the other hand, compresses the IKE SA negotiation phases, which consist of two exchanges and three messages.
In aggressive mode, the initiator passes all data that is required for the SA. 
The responder sends the proposal, key material, and ID, and authenticates the session in the next packet.
The initiator replies by authenticating the session. Negotiation is quicker, and the initiator and responder IDs pass in plaintext.


The use of main mode or aggressive mode is a tradeoff between performance and security. 
Main mode requires more messages but does not expose the identity of the peers. 
This identity is protected by the negotiated policies and keys that are negotiated in the first two exchanges.
Aggressive mode requires fewer messages and therefore is more efficient. 
However, peer identities are exposed before negotiating a secure channel, so it assumes a trusted transport and a more protected environment outside of IPsec. 
The choice of mode is a configurable option in most IPsec implementations.

The first step in IKEv1 main mode is to negotiate the security policy that will be used for the ISAKMP SA. 
There are five parameters, which require agreement from both sides:

a) Encryption algorithm
b) Hash algorithm
c) Diffie-Hellman group number
d) Peer authentication method
e) SA lifetime

The figure illustrates the security proposal negotiation in IKEv1 main mode. 
An IKE proposal specifies a value for each of these five parameters.
In the simplest environments, peers may be configured with just a single IKE proposal to which they both agree.
But, in more complex environments where there are multiple IPsec peers that have different security requirements, multiple IKE proposals must be configured.

The first exchange begins with the initiator packaging up its IKE proposals and sending them all to the responder.
The responder compares the IKE proposals that it is willing to accept with the proposals that it received. 
If there is not a match, negotiation fails. If there is a match, the responder will reply with the proposal that it accepted.

The second exchange in IKEv1 main mode negotiations facilitates Diffie-Hellman key agreement.
The Diffie-Hellman method allows two parties to share information over an untrusted network and mutually compute an identical shared secret that cannot be computed by eavesdroppers who intercept the shared information.

The mathematical operations are relatively easy to describe, expensive to compute, and intractable to reverse. 
The next figure shows the mathematical operations. Each Diffie-Hellman group specifies the values of p, a very larger prime number, and g, a primitive root modulo p. 
Both parties generate their private integers and perform the specified calculations to produce their public integers. 
They then perform another calculation that is based on their private integer and the public integer that they received from their peer to produce the shared key material.
Both parties compute the same shared key material. An attacker who intercepts the public values will find the problem of reverse computation to be intractable, with sufficiently large values of p.

Diffie-Hellman groups supported by Cisco IOS Software and the associated size of the value of the prime p:

DH Group 1: 768 bits
DH Group 2: 1024 bits
DH Group 5: 1536 bits
DH Group 14: 2048 bits
DH Group 15: 3072 bits
DH Group 16: 4096 bits

A Diffie-Hellman key agreement can also be based on elliptic curve cryptography. 
Its use is included in the Suite B cryptographic suites.
Diffie-Hellman groups 19, 20, and 24, based on elliptic curve cryptography, are also supported by Cisco IOS Software.

After the DH key exchange is complete, shared cryptographic keys are provisioned, but the peer is not yet authenticated. 
The device on the other end of the VPN tunnel must be authenticated before the communications path is considered secure. 
The last exchange of IKE Phase 1 authenticates the remote peer.

There are three data origin authentication methods:

* PSKs: A PSK is a secret key value that is entered into each peer manually and is used to authenticate the peer. 
  It is important to understand that the preshared key is not used for encryption. It is more like a password.
  
* RSA signatures: Authentication by RSA signatures uses the exchange of digital certificates to authenticate the peers.
  The certificate signatures are validated, verifying that the certificates have been signed by a trusted CA and the data in them is valid. 
  The peer certificate contains the peer’s public key. Only the authentic peer should have the private key that is associated with the public key in their certificate.
  
* RSA-encrypted nonce: An RSA encrypted nonce works in a similar way as an RSA signature, but does not utilize a certificate and PKI.
  It requires the manual entry of the peer public key in the router configuration. 
  This method is more secure than preshared keys, but it is more difficult to configure, and is less scalable than RSA signatures.


If the peer authentication fails, the ISAKMP SA is terminated. 
If the peer authentication succeeds, the ISAKMP SA provides a secure tunnel in which to negotiate Phase 2 IPsec SAs.

SA : security association. Instance of security policy and keying material applied to a data flow.
IKE

Internet Key Exchange. IKE establishes a shared security policy and authenticates keys for services (such as IPsec) that require keys. 
Before any IPsec traffic can be passed, each router, firewall, or host must verify the identity of its peer. 
Verification can be done by manually entering pre-shared keys into both hosts or by a CA service.


6)  Sample ISAKMP Configuration:

The command crypto isakmp policy priority, in global configuration mode, is used to enter ISAKMP configuration mode to specify the IKE proposal that is associated with the specified priority value. 
The priority is a locally significant value. The lower the priority, the more the local device prefers the proposal.

The command crypto isakmp policy priority, in global configuration mode, is used to enter ISAKMP configuration mode to specify the IKE proposal that is associated with the specified priority value. 
The priority is a locally significant value. The lower the priority, the more the local device prefers the proposal.

There are five parameters available for configuration:

a) Hash: The hash algorithm that is used for HMAC operations
b) Authentication: The method of validating the peer identity
c) Group: The Diffie-Hellman group number
d) Lifetime: The maximum number of seconds before the SA expires. SA expiration will force rekeying for continued communication.
e) Encryption: The encryption algorithm that is used to insure privacy

NOTE:
The five parameters can spell the acronym HAGLE. 
Since haggling is a form of negotiation, and the selection of ISAKMP policy is negotiated between IPsec peers, this acronym can be used as a memory aid.


The following is an example ISAKMP configuration:
#############

crypto isakmp policy 100
 encr aes
 hash sha256
 authentication pre-share
 group 5
 lifetime 43200
crypto isakmp policy 200
 encr 3des
 authentication pre-share
 group 2

##########

There are default values for each of the five parameters. 
If the default value is specified during the configuration process, it will not appear in the running configuration. 
If no value is specified during the configuration process, the default value will be used.
To verify the IKE proposals that are configured on a Cisco IOS device, use the show crypto isakmp policy command.

##########

Rtr-1#show crypto isakmp policy
Global IKE policy
Protection suite of priority 100
        encryption algorithm:   AES - Advanced Encryption Standard (128 bit keys).
        hash algorithm:         Secure Hash Standard 2 (256 bit)
        authentication method:  Pre-Shared Key
        Diffie-Hellman group:   #5 (1536 bit)
        lifetime:               43200 seconds, no volume limit
Protection suite of priority 200
        encryption algorithm:   Three key triple DES
        hash algorithm:         Secure Hash Standard
        authentication method:  Pre-Shared Key
        Diffie-Hellman group:   #2 (1024 bit)
        lifetime:               86400 seconds, no volume limit
        
############

7)  IPsec Protocols:

IPsec is a framework of open standards. IPsec spells out the messaging to secure the communication but relies on existing algorithms. 
There are two main IPsec framework protocols: AH and ESP.


AH, which is IP protocol 51, is the appropriate protocol to use when confidentiality is not required or permitted. AH does not provide data confidentiality (encryption). 
All text is transported unencrypted. If the AH protocol is used alone, it provides weak protection. 
AH does, however, provide origin authentication, data integrity, and anti-replay protection for IP packets that are passed between two systems.

AH achieves data integrity and origin authentication by applying a keyed one-way hash function to the packet. 
The following steps describe the process, which is illustrated in the figure:

a) The immutable fields of the IP header, the data payload, and a shared secret key that is used between the two systems are sent through a hash algorithm.

b) The hash algorithm creates a hash-based message authentication code. 
   It builds a new AH header that contains the HMAC and prepends the header to the original packet.

c) The new packet is transmitted to the IPsec peer router.

d) The peer router performs the same one-way hash function on the received packet and compares the result to the value of the hash that the sender has supplied. 
   The hashes must match exactly. Even if one bit is changed in the transmitted packet, the hash output on the received packet changes, and the AH header will not match.
   This process enables the receiver to detect changes that occur in any part of the packet during transit. 
   The fact that the one-way hash also involves the use of a shared-secret key between the two systems means that origin authentication is also assured.

AH supports the HMAC-MD5 and HMAC-SHA-1 algorithms. In modern IPsec VPN implementations, AH is not commonly used.


Like AH, ESP provides origin authentication, data integrity, and anti-replay protection; however, unlike AH, it also provides confidentiality. 
ESP, which is IP protocol 50, provides confidentiality by encrypting IP packets. 
IP packet encryption conceals the data payload and the identities of the ultimate source and destination. 
ESP supports various symmetric encryption algorithms, including DES, 3DES, and AES. 
The original data is well protected by ESP, because the entire original IP packet is encrypted. 
As illustrated in the figure, an ESP header and trailer are added to the encrypted payload. 
When ESP authentication is also used, the encrypted IP packet and the ESP header and trailer are included in the hashing process.

When both authentication and encryption are used, encryption is performed first.
Authentication is then performed by sending the encrypted payload through a hash algorithm. 
The hash provides data integrity and data origin authentication.
Finally, a new IP header is prepended to the authenticated payload.
The new IP address is used to route the packet. ESP does not attempt to provide data integrity for this new external IP header.

######
Note:

AH does provide data integrity for the external IP header. Due to this, AH is not compatible with NAT performed in the transmission path.
NAT changes the IP addresses in the IP header, causing AH data integrity checks to fail.

#####

Performing encryption before authentication facilitates rapid detection and rejection of replayed or bogus packets by the receiving device.
Before decrypting the packet, the receiver can authenticate inbound packets. 
By doing this authentication, it can quickly detect problems and potentially reduce the impact of DoS attacks. 
ESP can, optionally, enforce antireplay protection by requiring that a receiving host sets the replay bit in the header to indicate that the packet has been seen.

In modern IPsec VPN implementations, the use of ESP is common. Although both encryption and authentication are optional in ESP, one of them must be used.

ESP can operate in either tunnel mode or transport mode, as shown in the figure.

ESP Tunnel mode:

ESP tunnel mode protects the entire original IP packet, which is encrypted, including its IP header, and becomes the payload for the new packet.
An ESP header is applied for the transport layer header, and this is encapsulated in a new packet with a new IP header.
The new IP header specifies the VPN peers as the source and destination IP addresses. The IP addresses specified in the original IP packet are not visible.

ESP transport mode:

ESP transport mode does not protect the original packet IP header. Only the original packet payload is protected. 
An ESP header is inserted between the original IP header and the protected payload. 
Transport mode can be negotiated directly between two IP hosts.
ESP transport mode can be used for site-to-site VPN if another technology, such as GRE tunneling, is used to provide the outer IP header.


AH can also be implemented in either tunnel mode or transport mode. 
The key distinction between tunnel mode and transport mode is what is done with the original IP header.
Tunnel mode provides a new IP header. Transport mode maintains the original IP header.


8)  IKE Phase 2:

The purpose of IKE phase 2 is to negotiate the IPsec security parameters that define the IPsec SA, which protects the network data traversing the VPN. IKE phase 2 performs the following functions:

-Negotiates IPsec security parameters, which are known as IPsec transform sets
-Establishes IPsec SAs
-Periodically renegotiates IPsec SAs to ensure security
-Optionally, performs an additional DH exchange

IKE phase 1 offered two modes, main mode and aggressive mode, to negotiate the ISAKMP SA. 
IKE phase 2 only offers one mode, called quick mode, to negotiate the IPsec SAs. 
In phase 2, IKE negotiates the IPsec transform set and the shared keying material that is used by the transforms.
Among the negotiated parameters is the lifetime of the IPsec SA. 
When an IPsec SA expires, a replacement SA with new keying material is negotiated. 
The new keying material can be based off the original Diffie-Hellman agreements that are performed during the phase 1 negotiation.
Optionally, phase 2 can include its own Diffie-Hellman key exchange, using a feature called perfect forward secrecy.

It is important to note that the ISAKMP SA provides a bidirectional tunnel that is used to negotiate the IPsec SAs. 
The IPsec SAs, however, are unidirectional. Most commonly, there are two IPsec SAs.
Depending on the configuration, it is possible for multiple pairs of IPsec SAs to be negotiated between the IPsec peers.



9)  IPsec Configuration:

IPsec provides secure tunnels between two peers, such as two routers.
You can define which packets are considered sensitive and should be sent through these secure tunnels, and you define the parameters that should be used to protect these sensitive packets, by specifying characteristics of these tunnels. 
Then, when the IPsec peer sees such a sensitive packet, it sets up the appropriate secure tunnel and sends the packet through the tunnel to the remote peer.

In the figure, for Router A and Router B to peer and use IPsec to protect traffic between host A and Host B, three things must be explicitly defined in a construct that is called a crypto map:


a) Which data to protect? The routers will not protect all data. 
   Consider a VPN-capable router that connects a site to the Internet. 
   Much of the traffic traversing that router is associated with public Internet-based services.
   The router does not perform IPsec transformations on that data. Only specific data will be protected.

b) How to protect that data? Note the term “protect” rather than “encrypt.” 
   Encryption provides privacy, but that is only one aspect of IPsec protection. 
   IPsec also provides data integrity by the use of cryptographic hash-based message authentication. 
   IPsec also provides origin authentication by securely authenticating the peer system and sharing unique keys with that peer. 
   There are several algorithms available for these purposes. The particular desired algorithms must be specified.

c) Where to send the protected data? IPsec protects the entire original packet, including the IP header. 
   To facilitate forwarding via IP, a new IP header must be provided, specifying the configured peer’s IP address as the destination IP address.

For IPsec to succeed between two IPsec peers, the crypto maps on both peers must contain compatible configuration statements. 
The following is an example crypto map configuration.

######

crypto map VPNMAP 10 ipsec-isakmp 
 description Tunnel to Peer 1
 set peer 198.51.100.10
 set transform-set ESP-AES-SHA 
 match address Local-to-Peer1
 
extended IP access list Local-to-Peer1
    10 permit ip 10.10.0.0 0.0.255.255 172.16.111.0 0.0.0.255
 
crypto ipsec transform-set ESP-AES-SHA esp-aes esp-sha-hmac 
 mode tunnel
interface gigabitethernet 0/0
  crypto map VPNMAP
  
#######

10) Suite B Cryptographic Standard:

In most cryptographic functions, key length is an important security parameter. 
Both academic and private organizations provide recommendations and mathematical formulas to approximate the minimum key size requirement for security. 
Despite the availability of these publications, choosing an appropriate key size to protect systems and networks from attacks remains a challenge.

As computing power increases, the feasibility of commercially deploying complex encryption algorithms also increases. 
The main principle is that the degree of security depends on the length of the key of the encryption algorithm.
The time that it takes to process all the possibilities is a function of the computing power of the computer.
Therefore, the shorter the key, the easier it is to break the key.

In 2005, the NSA identified a set of cryptographic algorithms. 
Those algorithms, when used together, are the preferred method for ensuring the security and integrity of information that is passed over public networks such as the Internet. 
The NSA called the set of algorithms “Suite B.” Today, Suite B is globally recognized as an advanced, publicly available standard for cryptography. 
Suite B provides a security level of 128 bits or higher, significantly higher than many commonly used standards.

Integrated into IETF standards, Suite B algorithms make it easier to collaborate in environments where costs or logistics traditionally hindered information sharing. 
Secure sharing of information over the Internet and other nontrusted networks supports various missions at all levels of government.
Examples include intelligence agencies and the military in a government context, or private sector companies that are required to increase the security of transmitting sensitive content, such as intellectual property or private customer and employee information.

Another advantage of Suite B is that it helps public and private sector organizations meet compliance requirements. 
These requirements include compliance with PCI DSS, HIPAA, FIPS 140, and others.

As described in RFC 4869, Suite B cryptography secures information that is traveling over networks, using four well-established, public domain cryptographic algorithms:

Encryption that is based on AES using 128- or 256-bit keys
Hashing (digital fingerprinting) based on the SHA-2
Digital signatures with the ECDSA using curves with 256- and 384-bit prime moduli
Key exchange, either pre-shared or dynamic, using the ECDH method

The NSA has stated that these four algorithms in combination provide adequate information assurance for classified information. 
NSA Suite B cryptography for IPsec has been published as standard in RFC 4869, and it has gained acceptance in the industry.

11) IKE Version 2:

IKEv2, a next-generation key management protocol that is based on RFC 4306, is an enhancement of the IKE protocol.

IKE Version 2 is a next-generation key management protocol.
It combines all related specifications into RFC 4306. 
This improves simplicity and interoperability.
Protocol extensions that are included with IKE V2 include Dead Peer Detection, NAT Traversal, and initial contact.
IKE V2 has less overhead, which reduces latency and has a reduced SA delay, which remains consistent, even as packet size increases.

IKE V2 has faster rekey time. 
This improves performance and reduces packet loss. 
IKE V2 has better mitigation against denial of service attack. Using a cookie-based mechanism, the responder uses minimal CPU and commits no state to the SA, until it can completely validate the initiator. 
IKE V2 supports EAP, which allows peers to use different authentication mechanisms. 
For example, a VPN client may authenticate the VPN server using digital certificates, while the server authenticates the client via a pre-shared key. So this adds flexibility.
IKE V2 creates an SA without the use of phases. Peers start with an IKE_SA_INIT exchange, in which the peers establish a secure channel.
After this, all further communications are encrypted. Next, peers authenticate each other with an IKE_AUTH exchange. 
When IKE_AUTH completes, both peers have an IPsec SA to protect the tunnel traffic.
Each line in the crypto ACL specifies a single IPsec proxy. 
If there is more than one line in the crypto ACL, CREATE_CHILD_SA exchanges are used to negotiate additional IPsec SA's.

12) IPsec with IPv6:



IPsec support is mandatory for IPv6. Of course, it is your choice whether to use it or not.
IPsec is also native to IPv6 and defines new protocol headers that add authentication and confidentiality to IPv6 packets. 
This makes it easy for various devices to form peer-to-peer IPsec tunnels.

Like IPv4, IPv6 can leverage ESP and AH. In IPv4, AH and ESP were separate IP protocol headers. 
But IPv6 uses the extension header approach. ESP uses the Next Header value of 50 and AH uses the Next Header value of 51. 
IPv6 leverages the latest cryptography suites, such as Suite B and IKEv2.

Several options are available for transitioning to IPv6. 
Some of these options involve tunneling IPv6 in IPv4. 
When an IPv6 packet arrives at the edge router, it encapsulates the packet with a new IPv4 header.
This allows the transport of IPv6 traffic over an IPv4 cloud, but no security.

So, you can leverage IPv4 IPsec to provide VPN services to IPv6, typically using the ESP in tunnel mode. 
This means the entire IPv6-over-v4 packet is re-encapsulated into a new IPv4 header, with ESP header and trailers added.
When edge router B receives this, it strips all the encapsulation and forwards a native IPv6 packet toward the intended destination.










