Asymmetric algorithms utilize a pair of keys for encryption and decryption. 
The paired keys are intimately related and are generated together. 
Most commonly, an entity with a key pair will share one of the keys (the public key) and it will keep the other key in complete secrecy 
(the private key). The private key cannot, in any reasonable amount of time, be calculated from the public key. 
Data that is encrypted with the private key requires the public key to decrypt. 
Vice versa, data that is encrypted with the public key requires the private key to decrypt. 
Asymmetric encryption is also known as public key encryption.

typical key length range for asymmetric algorithms is 512 to 4096 bits

You cannot directly compare the key length of asymmetric and symmetric algorithms,
because the underlying design of the two algorithm families differs greatly.

Examples of asymmetric cryptographic algorithms include RSA, DSA, ElGamal, and elliptic curve algorithms.

RSA is one of the most common asymmetric algorithms. Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Len Adleman invented the RSA algorithm in 1977. It was a patented public-key algorithm.
patent expired in September 2000, so the algorithm is now in the public domain
Of all the public-key algorithms that have been proposed over the years, RSA is by far the easiest to understand and implement.

Current RSA keys are usually 1024 to 4096 bits long

The RSA algorithm is based on the fact that each entity has two keys, a public key and a private key.
The public key can be published and given away, but the private key must be kept secret. 
It is not possible to determine, using any computationally feasible algorithm, the private key from the public key, and vice versa. 
What one of the keys encrypts, the other key decrypts, and vice versa.


Asymmetric algorithms are substantially slower than symmetric algorithms. 
Their design is based on computational problems, such as factoring extremely large numbers or computing discrete logarithms of extremely large numbers. 
Because they lack speed, asymmetric algorithms are typically used in low-volume cryptographic mechanisms, such as digital signatures and key exchange. 
However, the key management of asymmetric algorithms tends to be simpler than symmetric algorithms, because usually one of the two encryption or decryption keys can be made public.


SSH 

two versions sshv1 and sshv2


SSHv1 uses a connection process as follows:

a) The client connects to the server and the server presents the client with its public key.

b) The client and server negotiate the security transforms. 
The two sides agree to a mutually supported symmetric encryption algorithm. 
This negotiation occurs in the clear. 
A party that intercepts the communication will be aware of the encryption algorithm that is agreed upon.

c) The client constructs a session key of the appropriate length to support the agreed-upon encryption algorithm. 
The client encrypts the session key with the server’s public key. 
Only the server has the appropriate private key that can decrypt the session key.

d) The client sends the encrypted session key to the server. 
The server decrypts the session key using its private key. 
At this point, both the client and the server have the shared session key. 
That key is not available to any other systems. From this point on, the session between the client and server is encrypted using a symmetric encryption algorithm.

e) With privacy in place, user authentication ensues. The user’s credentials and all other data are protected.

